From Philharmonic Hall in Lincoln Center,
home of the world’s greatest musical events,
another program in the
award-winning series -- THE NEW YORK
PHILHARMONIC YOUNG PEOPLE'S CONCERTS
under the musical direction of
Leonard Bernstein --
SKIPPED is brought to you by The Bell System, providing you and your family with the best in dependable, low cost telephone service.
And here is Mr. Bernstein.
That is the sound of
Dmitri Shostakovich: brilliant, powerful, noble, proud, declamatory,
rich with feeling. During this coming
year of 1966, this extraordinary Russian
composer will be 60 years old; and
we are dedicating this program
to him and to his lifelong devotion to
his art. May it long continue. Since
this is a birthday party, I'd like to
take a minute or two before we play
his music to make a sort of after-dinner
speech in his honor. I particularly want
to do this because, in these days of
musical experimentation, with new fads
chasing each other in and out of
concert-halls, a composer like
Shostakovich can be easily put down.
After all, he is basically a traditional
Russian composer -- a true son of
Chaikovsky! and no matter how "modern" he
gets, he never loses that tradition;
so the music is always, in some way,
old-fashioned -- at least, what critics
and musical intellectuals like to call
old-fashioned. But they’re forgetting one
most important thing: he’s a genius -- a
real, authentic genius. And there aren’t too
many of those around any more. That’s
why I want to make this
toast to him.
SKIPPED Shostakovich is a man of tremendous creativity. He has written symphonies -- 13 of them -- concertos, operas, chamber music, piano music, songs -- even a musical comedy. He is also a man of many moods, ranging from the most serious and gigantic symphonies to pieces so flip and trivial you can't believe they’re by the same composer. But what binds them all together is their Russian-ness.Shostakovich's devotion has not been only to his art, but also to his country, even to the principles of the Revolution in which he grew up. He is an extremely patriotic man, but he is also an individual, original artist; and that combination has sometimes gotten him into hot water with the people who guide that very revolution to which he is so dedicated. But always Shostakovich has bounced back into favor, either by apologizing, or by slightly changing his style, or perhaps really because the Russians know that he is their greatest composer, and they can’t afford to do without him. They simply have to forgive him — and so they do, which is all to their credit.
When the New
York Philharmonic and I visited Russia,
back in 1959, we twice had the pleasure and
privilege of playing Shostakovich’s music in his presence.
SKIPPED On both occasions he was very kind and generous with his compliments, came to the stage and embraced me, Russian style, and in general behaved like anybody's favorite uncle or brother-in-law.
But on other occasions I had an impression of a very reserved man,
speaking almost not at all, a bit nervous, and
very shy. I suspect that that is the true
nature of the man; but you'd never know
it from hearing his music. As a composer he
has a great deal to say, serious
or light, and he says
it with enormous confidence, ease, and
boldness. I suppose that's one of the
most fascinating things about vrtists --
how different they can be, as people, from
the art they create. The most sure-handed
painter may be very insecure in his
daily life; the greatest writer may
have trouble spelling the simplest words;
the most intelligent physicist may
be incapable of adding up a
grocery bill. Shostakovich
is a bit like that. Out of this
shy man, hidden behind his eyeglasses, has
come some of the most potent, brash,
un-shy music ever written. His famous
7th Symphony, known as the "Leningrad
Symphony" -- which was written in Leningrad
while the city was more often
than not in flames from the German
bombings -- that 7th Symphony lasts 75
minutes, requires an extra brass band, and
makes the walls fall down. Nothing shy
about that. His latest symphony,
number 13, lasts an hour, and includes a
male chorus which sings Yevtushenko’s
famous poem against anti-semitism. Yes,
Shostakovich has a lot to say,
musically, and very often what he says is
noble, original, and deeply moving. But
this is a birthday party for Shostakovich, and birthday
parties should be gay and amusing, not
necessarily noble and moving. Besides,
SKIPPED you should know that apart from his patriotism, nobility, seriousness, and all the rest,
Shostakovich is also
world-famous for his marvelous sense of
humor.
He has written some of the most downright
funny music there is to be heard. So
I think it's especially proper
for us to celebrate his birthday in an
atmosphere of fun.
Instead of a long serious work, we’re
going to play you one of his gayest and
most amusing works -- his 9th Symphony.
It’s a short work, so we
can play you all of it, and I think
you’re going to enjoy it a lot.
The 9th Symphony by Shostakovich is
like a witty comedy in the theatre,
where you are treated to one joke after another --
puns,
wise-cracks, sight-gags, punch-lines, surprises,
twisteroos -- but somehow all adding up to
a work of art. Now almost every symphony
has some kind of joke in it: even the
most serious symphony by Beethoven or
Mahler has at least one movement (usually
called the scherzo) which is humorous --
maybe not out-and-out comical, but humorous in some way:
either bitterly humorous, or merrily humorous, or mockingly humorous. But
this whole symphony by Shostakovich is
all humorous, every minute and every
movement. It is all one big series of jokes.
The first and foremost joke is the very
fact that it is his Ninth Symphony. You
may well ask what’s so funny about that;
well, I’ll tell you. That number nine is a
magic number with composers; ever since
Beethoven it has come to mean the crowning
final achievement of a symphonic composer.
Beethoven’s Ninth, as you must know, is the
huge symphonic monument of his whole
lifetime -- his last symphony. And since then,
SKIPPPED
there have been many other great and final Ninth Symphonies, all of them gigantic farewells -- Schubert’s 9th, Mahler’s 9th, Bruckner’s 9th -- and so
it’s become almost a tradition for a
composer to end his life with his
9th symphony -- if he can make it, of
course. Brahms and Schumann never
got beyond number 4. Mendelssohn reached
5, and Chaikovsky 6. But if
you can reach number 9, it had better be
a whopper, worthy of its magic number.
Not Shostakovich, though. You see, he had just
written two whoppers, numbers 7 and
8 -- both very long, very serious,
very patriotic, and both
having grown out of his wartime emotions.
But now it was 1945, the war was over, and
it was time for a little relief from
those two gigantic symphonies 7 and 8. So
out came No. 9 -- a little number 9; and
that in itself is a twisteroo.
But the real jokes begin with the music
itself.
The first movement, for instance, is written like an old-time
classical symphony, as if by Haydn, with
all the rules strictly observed. That
also doesn’t sound very funny at first,
but it turns out to be as soon
as you realize that it's not by Haydn, but
by a modern composer named Shostakovich;
and that this 18th century classical
form is really just a spoof -- a take-off of
the old form. And the
more strictly it imitates Haydn, the
funnier it is, as you begin to recognize
your old pals -- Exposition, Development, and
Recapitulation -- remember those
3 parts of the sonata form?
And he goes even further by dutifully
repeating the exposition, by putting the 2nd theme
in the dominant key, just as the old
rules dictated, and having the
recapitulation of it in the tonic key -- all
those formulas from the distant past, dug
up again, and burlesqued. What makes it
even funnier is that his gay little
Haydn-ish tunes are treated to a modern
face-lifting, so that they’re constantly
surprising you into double-takes. For instance,
the very opening theme is a merry,
bouncing tune in E-flat major, just
like Haydn -- until it suddenly stumbles
on a loud wrong note.
Now that wrong note (SING) wouldn't sound so
wrong if it didn't have such a strong
accent on it, to say nothing of a trill --
-- which makes the accent even stronger. In
other words, Shostakovich is calling your
special attention to this wrong note,
like a clown who slips on a banana peel,
and laughs at himself before you do. But
it's not only these mischievous wrong-
note tunes of Shostakovich that make his
humor; it’s also his way of adding or
skipping a beat here and there, where you
least expect it — as in this little theme,
which follows the one we just heard.
Did you hear that extra beat? It’s
especially obvious in this tune,
which goes in what is called a sequence --
that is, the same phrase repeated at a
higher pitch. So once you hear the first
phrase,--
-- you expect the 2nd one
to be identical, only higher:
But that’s not what you get -- almost, but
not quite. What you do get is a second
phrase that repeats the first at a
higher pitch all right, but with one extra
beat added -- just enough to knock you off
balance -- like that
tipsy clown.
Do you hear it now? I’m sure you do.
Of course it’s not the sort of
joke that will make you shriek with
laughter -- no musical joke is; but
it’s just enough of a twist to make you
smile inside — and that’s what a good
musical joke should do. This movement
is full of twists like that: melodic
surprises, rhythmic surprises, and
especially harmonic surprises -- that is,
moments when you expect the harmony to
go one way, and it goes somewhere else,
completely unexpectedly. Like this spot a
little later on, where
the opening theme is repeated, very loud, in the
original key of E-flat major, and must
now switch to another key, in which the
second theme is going to appear -- namely
the dominant, B-flat major. But
Shostakovich switches his key
to the furthest harmonic point away from
B-flat major, so that when B-flat
finally does appear it's a shocker, right
out of the blue. Look how he does it:
here is the first theme, with its harmonic switch.
That's a mile away from where
we're headed: but without so much
as a blink of the eye, Shostakovich
wrenches us into the required new key of
B-flat.
You see? No
preparation at all for this new key -- or
rather a misleading
preparation, as if for a totally
foreign key, and then -- bang! B-flat major.
Listen to the whole section now, and see
how the harmony jerks you from key to
key:
See, it's like a ride on some mad Coney
Island machine -- The Whip, I think they call it -- where you're whipped and
flung in fifty directions, always when you
least expect it.
But anyway, shaken up as we are, we have
reached the dominant key of B-flat, and
are now ready for the appearance of
the 2nd theme. Now, you may remember from our program
on Sonata Form that the 2nd theme of
a symphonic movement should provide a
contrast with the first theme — not only
in key, but also in feeling; that is, if the
first theme is strong and manly, the
2nd theme is likely to be sweet and
feminine. Or vice versa. Anyway, in this
case the first theme was
playful and bouncy; so we are led to
expect a 2nd theme that will contrast
by being sweet and smooth. And what do we
get? Anything but. Instead, out comes a
jaunty little marching tune, whistled by
the tiny, tinny piccolo:
And so on. Another surprise.
You see, most musical jokes are surprises,
just as most other jokes are; you expect
one thing and get another, and
somehow that tickles your funny bone.
Why? Nobody knows.
SKIPPED Experts have tried to explain this for centuries, and they still don't know why surprises are funny.
And this surprising,
silly 2nd theme is even sillier
when it comes back in the recapitulation
SKIPPED (in the tonic key, of course!) --
because this time it’s played not
by the piccolo but by one solo
violin, forcing out his squeaky
little tune over the accompaniment of a
whole brass section:
It’s like Mickey Mouse leading a football
cheer -- that high, puny voice competing
with a brass band. And speaking
of the brass band, my favorite joke of the
whole movement is made by that hefty
trombone who introduces this
tune each time it comes with those
pompous two notes:
As you’ll see when
we play the whole movement, all through
this section of the recapitulation
leading up to the squeaky 2nd theme,
that trombone keeps plowing in with his
2 notes, always in the wrong places,
as though he’s skipped 50 bars of music,
and has come in too soon:
Poor man -- absolutely lost! But he
doesn't give up -- he keeps trying -- like
Pluto in those cartoons.
Heaven be praised! He's made it at last. And the cartoon
ends in a burst of pride and glory.
Naturally I can't tell you all the jokes
in advance; I've got to leave some for you
to discover yourselves. Which I hope
you will, as you listen to this delightful first
movement of the 9th Symphony by Dmitri
Shostakovich.
The second movement of this 9th
Symphony by Shostakovich doesn't seem to
be a joke at all. It's a quiet,
sweet little waltz, actually rather sad.
There is no horseplay here, as there was with
the trombone in the first movement -- in
fact, the trumpets and trombones don’t
play at all in this piece, and neither
does the percussion. It’s all on a
smaller scale, almost like chamber music,
with haunting long melodies played by
solo woodwinds. It opens with
this clarinet solo:
And so it goes, wending its melancholy
way. Later that long line is
repeated by the solo flute and at the
very end by our old friend the piccolo
who has changed from his perky personality
into this gentle, wistful one. And in
between these different woodwind solos,
the strings play strange, yearning waves
of melody:
Rather brooding, isn’t it?
Very Russian. Now certainly none of this
material sounds particularly humorous or
jokey. Then where does the humor
come in? Didn’t I say that this whole
symphony was a comedy? And I suppose you're going to hold me to it? -- All right -- let me
explain. The humor of this movement is
that it doesn’t belong in a
symphony at all -- especially a Ninth
Symphony. With its reduced, chamber-size
orchestra and its sad little waltz-
themes, it’s more like what used to be
called Salon Music -- that is, music not so
much for the concert-hall as for hotel-
lobbies and old-fashioned restaurants,
or for a private, elegant tea-party.
It’s a piece that might have been called,
in times gone by,
"Valse Mélancolique" --
which doesn’t just mean a melancholy
waltz, but suggests a whole era of grand,
faded elegance. And the fact that
Shostakovich puts this
into his 9th Symphony shows a very
subtle brand of humor -- nothing to make
you fall on the floor with laughter, but
to fill you with a light, sweet,
unexpected pleasure. Again, it’s the
unexpected quality of it that makes you
smile, even a melancholy smile. So here is
the very unsymphonic 2nd movement of this most
unusual symphony.
Pretty, charming, sweet music -- and anything
but symphonic. But
now, enough of melancholy; from here on in,
the jokes fly thick and fast. The three
movements which conclude this
symphony are all joined together, and played
continuously, like one big stream of fun.
First there is the scherzo -- the
traditionally humorous movement that
occurs in almost every symphony. In fact,
the word scherzo means "joke" in Italian;
and Shostakovich's scherzo is no
exception. It’s fast and gay and brilliant,
full of rollicking rhythms, delicious
wrong notes and startling twists of
harmony. And right in the middle of this
playful movement, there is suddenly a
standing Spanish rhythm, over which a
solo trumpet blares out an astonishing
Spanish-type tune, like bull-fight music:
Now what in the world is a Spanish
bullfighter doing in this symphony? Well,
as I said, it's full of surprises;
anything can happen. It's as though
suddenly, at a party, someone grabbed the
Spanish shawl off the piano, wrapped
himself in it, and gave out with a wild
gypsy dance. But the best joke of
the scherzo is still to come:
it simply dies. Imagine, this
rollicking piece suddenly winds down, like
an old phonograph, and comes to an
embarrassed stop on the most unlikely
note, as if it didn’t know quite what to
do or where to go. And where it does go
is the most unexpected place of all --
straight into the 4th movement,
which is a total surprise. It’s only 2
pages long — you can’t really even call it
a movement; but in those 2 pages we
find the main joke of the whole symphony:
the music suddenly becomes slow
and pompous and solemn. Imagine, in the
middle of this happy little symphony, the
trombones, with all their might, thunder out
a majestic fanfare, as if to introduce
some great tragic utterance:
Good heavens, what a change! Is this joke-
symphony really going to pieces? What are we
doing with great utterances?
Well, let's see what this tragic
statement turns out to be:
it’s a bassoon solo, in a free reciting
style, very mournful and very tragic.
Now that doesn’t seem to belong in this
symphony any more than that Spanish
Fandango we heard before. But why just this
bassoon solo? I’ll tell you: it’s a
private musical joke. Because what
Shostakovich is doing is imitating a similar
passage in Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony --
the part that introduces the famous Ode
to Joy (SING). Of course you know that.
Well, just before it, there is this
recitation by the cellos and basses:
And now here Shostakovich
has his mournful bassoon doing
much the same thing, even in the same key, --
--, as if to say, this is going to be a real
Ninth Symphony, tragic and monumental and
everything! Just like Beethoven! And then he has
his trombones repeat the pompous fanfare,
and again the bassoon wails out
his cadenza, only even more mournful now,
more Russian, more emotional. And that’s
the end of the whole 4th movement,
because, super-surprise of all, this same
mournful bassoon, without so much as
drawing breath, (BASSOON HOLD C-flat) slyly sneaks
into a saucy little dance-tune --
And the tune gradually gathers momentum, as
little by little the whole orchestra
picks it up, until soon we're galloping
away into the 5th and final movement,
which is a brilliant, breathless Rondo.
And so it turns out that after all, that
pompous little 4th movement was just
a decoy, to lure us into expecting a real
Ninth Symphony, a great Beethovenish
one -- and then to find that it's
still only that same darling little
Shostakovich Ninth!
It's like sitting down to a big serious
banquet, and being served hotdogs and
potato chips. Some people might not
think that very funny, either; but I'm
sorry for them; they won’t get
the joke in this symphony. You have
to have as much of a sense of humor to
appreciate this music as Shostakovich
had to have in order to write it. And I
very much hope you do, so that you
can now enjoy these concluding 3
movements -- that Spanish Scherzo,
then the pompous trombone-and-bassoon
bit, and the exciting final joyride. Happy
listening! And Happy Birthday: Dmitri
Shostakovich!
From Philharmonic Hall in Lincoln Center --
another program in the award-winning
series -- The New York Philharmonic Young
People's Concerts under the musical
direction of Leonard Bernstein has
presented "A Birthday Tribute to Dmitri
Shostakovich." Featured today was a
complete performance of Shostakovich’s
9th Symphony.
SKIPPED The next program in the series will be seen in seven weeks, on Tuesday, February 22nd, when Mr. Bernstein will present "Young Performers." This program was recorded in Philharmonic Hall and was produced and directed by Roger Englander. The N.Y. Philharmonic Young People's Concerts are brought to you by the Bell System, reminding you that someone, somewhere would enjoy hearing your voice by telephone tonight. A long-distance call is the next best thing to being there.